In this lecture, you'll learn about summarization and the default route. On the slide here,
this is a summary of what we configured in the last lecture. So on R1,
we don't need to enter routes for its directly connected networks.
They were automatically put into the routing table when we configured our IP addresses.
But, we do need to configure routes for anywhere that the router is not directly attached to.
So we've got routes to the 10.1.2.0/24 network, 10.1.1.0/24 network, and the 10.1.0.0/24 network, which are all
available behind R2,
but it is actually possible to summarize that into one route.
For static routing, summary routes lessen the administrative overhead because if you've got
less routes to configure, that lessens the workload on you.
It also lessens the memory usage on the routers. The last routes that are in the routing table, the
last memory it's going to take up.
And you see an example here.
We're going down from three routes to one
route, which isn't much of a difference
but in large environments, it can make a big difference. So the way we do the
summary is on R1, rather than having the three
routes.
Let's go back in the slide,
So you saw the traditional way of doing it.
I've got a separate route for the 10.1.0.0/24 network, 10.1.1.0/24 network,
and the 10.1.2.0/24 network, which are all pointing at the same next hop. When our subnets are in contiguous
ranges like this,
following on one from the other, it's usually possible to summarize them, which is what we've done here.
So rather than having separate routes for 10.1.0.0, 10.1.1.0, and 10.1.2.0, which
are all of a /24, I've configured one route for 10.1.0.0 with a subnet mask of
255.255.0.0.
This route will be good for all subnets that begin with 10.1, so 10.1.0.0, 10.1.1.0,
10.1.2.0, etc., and they're all reachable through 10.0.0.2.
So, that's how we configure summarization.
And in our example here, I summarized at the classful boundary for a class B address, which is going to
cover our routes all the way from 10.1.0.0 to 10.1.255.0, which is a pretty big
range.
Maybe we don't want to have all of those subnets available behind R2,
maybe some of them that are still within the 10.1.0.0 are available through a different path.
So you can be a bit tighter with your summarization like you see in the example here.
So rather than saying ip route 10.1.0.0 and then to 255.255.0.0, here I've said ip
route 10.1.0.0,
and then I've used a subnet mask of 255.255.252.0, and again pointing at
R2 at 10.0.0.2. To see what's happening here,
if you remember back to the subnetting section, I know that it's definitely going to begin with 255.255
because all of the subnets I'm pointing at begin with 10.1.
It's on the next octet
that I am going to be summarizing.
Here, I just want to summarize 10.1.0.0 to 10.1.3.0 and I've used the value of 255.255.252.0.
You know the way that the subnetting goes up,
it goes up from from 252 to 254, and then to 255.
So that means that I've used two bits there. Two bits gives us four possible values.
That's where we get the zero to the three from.
Okay, so that's how we configure our summary routes.
Next thing is the Longest Prefix Match.
So this is something that can come up, particularly when you do have summary routes.
So in the example here, it's the same topology before
but we've now also added R5.
The link from R1 to R5 is on the 10.0.3.0/24 network and it is directly connected.
There is also a subnet of 10.1.3.0/24 which is running from R4 to R5.
So if I just left it with my route of 'ip route 10.1.0.0 255.255.0.0, 10.0.0.2'
you see the path that traffic would take to get to R5 at 10.1.3.2
or anything on the 10.1.3 network is it would go from R1 to R2 to R3 to R4
and then to R5, because my route is pointing at
10.0.0.2. Now, I do want traffic for all of the 10.1 networks like 10.1.0.0 and 10.1.1.0,
and maybe I've got a 10.1.4.0 also behind R4 here
I want all of that traffic to go via R2.
But if I'm sending traffic to the 10.1.3.0 subnet,  I don't want it to go along the top path.
I want it to go along the bottom path via R5 because that's a more direct route.
So I'm also going to add a route for that as well, which is 'ip route
10.1.3.0 255.255.255.0 10.0.3.2'.
Now you see if I send traffic to 10.1.1.0, well that only matches one of these routes, which is the top one.
Obviously, it doesn't match 10.1.3.0,
so it will take the top route and it will go via R2 at 10.0.0.2.
If I send traffic to 10.1.3.0, that matches the top
route, and it also matches the bottom route as well.
And both of these are in the routing table.
So, which route is
the router going to take? It takes the one with the longest prefix.
The second route is got a prefix of 255.255.255.0.
The first route is got 255.255.0.0. So
the second route is a longest prefix.
So, all traffic for the 10.1.0.0 networks will go via R2 unless it's for 10.1.3.0, which will go via
R5, which is exactly what I want to happen.
Another way of saying the longest prefix match and I'm more intuitive way of thinking about that is whichever
is the most specific route is going to win.
Okay, so that's what happens when you have overlapping routes.
But what if you've got multiple routes for the exact same destination? Meaning, it has the same destination
IP address and the same prefix as well?
In that case, the router will load balance the traffic over those routes.
So see the example here. On R1,
we've got a couple of routes and they're both going to the exact same destination. They're both for
10.1.0.0, and the subnet mask of 255.255.0.0. One route has the next hop of
10.0.0.2 and the other route has the next hop of 10.0.3.2.
So in this case, they're both exactly the same,
then the router will load balance traffic over the two different next hops.
Okay, last thing to tell you about in this lecture is the default gateway, which shows up when you do a 'show
ip route' is the gateway of last resort. So in the topology here,
it's the same example as the last slide,
but let's say that we also have a route going out to the Internet.
So R1 is connected to the Internet.
We're using a public IP address there, on the R1 side it's 203.0.113.1.
And on the Internet side, it's 203.0.113.2 at
our service provider. So to add a route going out to everywhere else that we haven't specifically
had a route for elsewhere,
it is '0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0' so
our full command is 'ip route 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0' going to the next hop at our service
provider of 203.0.113.2.
So a default route is a catch-all for any traffic that does not match one of our more specific routes.
So in our example here,
if we sent traffic to the 10.1.1.0 network, that will match the top
route going to 10.1.0.0 and it will also match to
the bottom route going to 0.0.0.0,
which is everything.
The top route is more specific
so that will be sent to R2 at 10.0.0.2. If we send traffic to the 10.1.3.0 network, that
will match all three routes
but it's the middle route which is more specific,
so that will be sent to R5 at 10.0.3.2.
If we send traffic out to the Internet at 50.50.50.50,
it doesn't match
the first two routes. It only matches the last route,
So that will be sent out to the Internet.
Okay, so that was our default route and our summarization. Next lecture,
we'll take a look at this in the lab.